...
Welcome to the third and last segment of lecture five.
In the previous segment, we use simulations to check
our probability calculations.
It was really unnecessary there, but it was kind of fun.
Now I want to get a bit more serious about simulations
and talk about what exactly a simulation model is
and how we use it.
Think of a simulation model as a description
of a set of computations that provide
useful information about the possible behaviors of something
in the real world, that is, of the system being modeled.
Simulation models are typically most useful
when there is more than one possible behavior,
but that's certainly not the only situation
in which simulations are useful, as we will
see as the course continuous.
Simulation models are descriptive, not prescriptive.
They're used to tell us what might happen,
but they don't tell us how to make something happen.
This is in direct contrast to optimization,
which as we've seen, provides a prescription
for reaching some goal.
Finally, and this is really important to remember,
a simulation, like any model, is only
an approximation to reality.
As George Box, one of the giants of 20th century statistics
said, all models are wrong, but some are useful.
So don't ever feel too confident about your simulation model.
Remember, it's a model.
It's not reality.
All right why are simulations so useful?
An important thing is that they can
be used to model systems that are mathematically intractable,
that we can't write a simple set of equations and solve them.
For example, to predict the future climate of the Earth,
we simulate a bunch of interactions of the things
that we believe are the most important drivers
of the climate, atmosphere, oceans, land surface, ice, et
cetera.
More mundanely, simulations are typically
used to understand the behavior of say, a new processor chip
before that chip is built. Even when
it might be possible to formulate and solve
a mathematical model of a complex system,
simulations are often useful to extract
useful intermediate results.
Finally, as we will see in really the rest of the course,
simulations lend themselves to development
by successive refinement.
We can start with a relatively simple simulation that
captures only some aspect of the system we're interested in
and then slowly, step by step, make it more complicated,
more realistic.
Additionally, simulations are great for answering
what if questions.
What if we change this to that?
How will it affect the results?
We're going to start by looking at a very simple simulation
of something called a random walk.
Why are we starting with random walks?
Well, mostly because they're important in many domains.
If you want to understand how stock prices move,
a random walk is a great model to start with.
On the right of my slide you can see
I have a picture of a book that had a big impact on how people
understand stocks.
The idea that, in fact, there's nothing deep.
They're moving around often, at least kind of, at random.
Physicists, chemists, others use random
walks to model diffusion processes,
a very important element of a lot of science.
Many of the things, some of which
we'll talk about as we go.
Since random walks are simple to simulate,
they provide a good introduction to simulation,
which is why I'm starting with them here.
I should also, to be honest, admit
I'm doing this not just to teach you about simulations
and random walks, but as an excuse
to cover some important programming
topics which we haven't gotten to.
We'll see how to use inheritance mechanisms to really make
things much simpler and we'll see a lot more about plotting,
both in random walks and throughout our use
of simulations.
Random walks are not new.
They've been around a long time.
They were first discovered, I guess,
is the right word by Robert Brown in 1827
looking at particles of pollen floating in a liquid.
He didn't have this beautiful animation,
but what you see here is red and blue particles moving around
in a random way.
After Brown, the next big step forward
was Louis Bachelier, who wrote a thesis on the movement of stock
prices and option prices.
In 1900 it had almost no influence.
It was considered very disreputable to be looking
at the finance in those days, but looking backwards
it was an important piece of work.
And then many of you will recognize this picture,
Albert Einstein in 1905 wrote a paper
on the movement of small particles suspended
in a stationary liquid demanded by the molecular kinetic theory
of heat.
That's a mouthful, but it was really
an important paper that really changed
a lot of the world of physics and science in general.
OK, enough talking about fancy notions of random walks.
Let's look at a simple walk that actually involves walking.
So a television star, let's call him Homer,
imagine that he's standing in the middle of a field that
somehow inexplicably has been mowed to look
like a sheet of graph paper.
Now every second Homer takes a step in some random direction,
random because he's had so much beer he
has no idea where he's going.
So let's ask the question if he takes
1,000 such steps, what is the expected
distance from the origin?
Think about this for a minute.
If he takes many steps is he likely to move ever
further from the origin, or since he's moving at random,
is he likely just wander back and forth and get to the origin
over and over again, and maybe end up
not far from where he started?
So we're going to write a simulation that
answers that question, but before we do that, we're
going to do a hand simulation just to get an idea of what
might be going on.
So to simplify things let's begin
by assuming that each step Homer takes is of length 1
and is parallel to either the x-axis or the y-axis.
So one possible first step would be a step south or down.
He could take a step west, take a step north,
or he could take a step east.
In each case, we see that he's exactly one unit away
from the origin.
So we know how far you can get if you take steps of one walk.
What about after two steps?
Well, let's, without loss of generality,
say he started here, one step east.
After two steps, those are the places he could be.
So we see looking at the picture that with a probability
of 0.25, or a quarter, he'll be 0 units away.
Got back where he started.
With a probability of 0.25 he'll be 2 units away,
with a probability of 0.25, he'll be 2 units away,
and with a probability of 0.5, he'll be how many units away?
The square root of 2 units away.
Why the square root of 2?
Well, we get back to our friend Pythagoras
in the Pythagorean theorem, we can draw a triangle here.
If we look at this distance, we see
that we have a unit here of one, unit here of one,
and then that will be that and so we know that
by the Pythagorean theorem that c squared
equals a squared plus b squared, so the hypotenuse here
will be the square root of 2.
Well what's expected distance from the origin
after two steps?
Well, we can write this out as a formula, and let's do it.
So we know that with a probability
of 0.25 he's going to be 0 steps away, so 0.25 times 0,
plus with a probability of 0.25 he'll be how far away?
Well, he could be here, which is two steps.
And then there are these two possibilities,
So that's 0.5 times the square root of 2.
And if we do the arithmetic, we see that this equation
is roughly equal to 1.2.
So we see that after two steps he is, on average, further away
than after one step.
Well that doesn't tell us much about three steps.
How about after a hundred thousand steps?
I can assure you that I got tired of this hand simulation
after three steps when I saw how quickly the number
of possible paths was growing.
I'm not going to do 100,000.
We need a different approach to the problem.
We'll use a simulation.
We'll write some code to simulate large numbers of walks
and see where the average location is
relative to the origin, but we won't do this
until the next lecture.
