Coefficient
A coefficient is a number—the constant—in a variable term in a mathematical expression. The University of Chicago gives
the example of 3c + 8d, in which 3 and 8 are coefficients.

Factor
Every mathematical product contains two or more numbers. Those numbers are called factors.

Fibonacci sequence
Named after an early Italian mathematician, the Fibonacci sequence is a string of numbers where each number in the
sequence is the sum of the two preceding numbers. For example, 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21.

Natural numbers
Natural numbers are a part of the number system which includes all the positive integers from 1 till infinity and are also
used for counting purpose. It does not include zero (0). In fact, 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9…., are also called counting numbers.

Rational numbers
A rational number is a number that can be written in the form of a common fraction of two integers. In other words, it is
a number that can be represented as one integer divided by another integer.

Irrational numbers
Irrational numbers are real numbers that can't be made by dividing two integers, which have no fractional parts. The
decimals of irrational numbers go on infinitely. The most famous irrational number of all is pi.

Logarithm
Mathematicians used logarithms to determine the power to which a base or fixed number has to be raised to get to a given
number. Math is Fun defines it simply as "How many of this number do we multiply to get that number?"

Complex number
Complex numbers are the combination of real numbers and "imaginary" numbers. Virtually every number is a real number
since real numbers represent the value of a continuous quantity. Imaginary numbers are unusual numbers that give a
negative result when squared.

Reciprocal
To find a number's reciprocal, mathematicians divide one by that number. For example, the reciprocal of 4 is 1/4.

Polynomial
a polynomial is an expression consisting of indeterminates (also called variables) and coefficients, that involves only
the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and positive-integer powers of variables. An example of a
polynomial of a single indeterminate x is x2 − 4x + 7. An example in three variables is x^3 + 2xyz^2 − yz + 1.

Factoring
In mathematics, factoring, also referred to as factorization, involves breaking down a number or mathematical objects
(if possible) into a product of several factors. E.g., Factor 24: 24 = 2 × 2 × 2 × 3
It is also possible to factor other mathematical objects, such as polynomials. E.g., Factor x^2 - 16:
x^2 - 16 = (x - 4)(x + 4)
The above is an example of an expression that is relatively easy to factor. The format of the expression, a2 - b2, is
referred to as a difference of squares.

When you see an expression of this format, you can factor it to (a - b)(a + b) as shown above.

Simplify
Simplification is the process of "simplifying" a mathematical expression, which most often results in the expression
being shorter and easier to work with. Simplifying an expression can involve a range of operations such as basic arithmetic,
combining like terms, factoring, using exponent or logarithm rules, trigonometric identities, and more.

1. Simplify the expression x + 3x + 4. x + 3x +4 = 4x + 4

home / algebra / expressions and equations / simplify
Simplify
Simplification is the process of "simplifying" a mathematical expression, which most often results in the expression being
shorter and easier to work with. Simplifying an expression can involve a range of operations such as basic arithmetic,
combining like terms, factoring, using exponent or logarithm rules, trigonometric identities, and more.

One of the earliest points we may encounter simplification is learning about fractions. Though simplifying fractions is used
within the study of algebra, we won't go into detail about how to simplify fractions here. Refer to the simplifying fractions
page for more detail. Instead, we will look at simplification in an algebraic context.

Simplifying polynomial expressions
Polynomial expressions are expressions that only involve the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
non-negative integer exponents of variables. If the expression involves division of a variable, it is a rational expression
(discussed later), not a polynomial expression.

There are many ways to simplify an expression, but generally, we need to follow order of operations while combining like terms,
factoring, or maybe expanding. We can also reduce fractions or terms that share the same factors, whether they are variables or
constants. There are numerous tricks or patterns for simplifying that we can notice with practice, and the ability to simplify
expressions is a necessary skill within the study of algebra, as well as many other areas of mathematics.

Examples

1. Simplify the expression x + 3x + 4.

x + 3x + 4 = 4x + 4

In this case, simplifying the expression just involved combining the like terms, x and 3x. Depending on the goal, we could also
factor the expression 4x + 4. 4x + 4 = 4(x + 1)

2. Simplify (x + 2)^2 + 4x - x^2 + 3(4 + 2).

Start by adding the terms in parenthesis and expanding (x + 2)^2.
x^2 + 4x + 4 + 4x - x^2 + 3(6)

Then we can start combining like terms.
8x + 4 + 18 = 8x + 22

This is in simplest form, unless we want to have it in factored form, and see that 8 and 22 share a factor of 2:
8x + 22 = 2(4x + 11)
